### 1.1

An algorithm is a procedure that takes any of the possible input instances
and transforms it to the desired output.

`insertion sort` is a method for sorting that starts with a single element (thus forming a trivially sorted list) and then incrementally inserts the remaining elements so that the list stays sorted.

```
insertion_sort(item s[], int n)
{
    int i,j; /* counters */
            for (i=1; i<n; i++) {
            j=i;
            while ((j>0) && (s[j] < s[j-1])) {
                swap(&s[j],&s[j-1]);
            j = j-1;
        }
    }
}
```

Take-Home Lesson: There is a fundamental difference between algorithms,
which always produce a correct result, and heuristics, which may usually do a
good job but without providing any guarantee.

```
Problem: Robot Tour Optimization
Input: A set S of n points in the plane.
Output: What is the shortest cycle tour that visits each point in the set S?
```

This is an example of the traveling salesman problem.

Could try enumerating every possible path:

```
OptimalTSP(P)
d = ∞
For each of the n! permutations Pi of point set P
If (cost(Pi) ≤ d) then d = cost(Pi) and Pmin = Pi
Return Pmin
```

.. but this would take the fastest computer days to compute. Similarly,

### 1.2

```
Problem: Movie Scheduling Problem
Input: A set I of n intervals on the line.
Output: What is the largest subset of mutually non-overlapping intervals which can
be selected from I?
```

A scheduling problem is O(2^n) which also is extremely slow with a large amount of inputs. This time there is an optimal solution though.

```
OptimalScheduling(I)
While (I = ∅) do
Accept the job j from I with the earliest completion date.
Delete j, and any interval which intersects j from I.
```

Take-Home Lesson: Reasonable-looking algorithms can easily be incorrect. Algorithm
correctness is a property that must be carefully demonstrated.

### 1.3

We need tools to distinguish correct algorithms from incorrect ones, the primary one of which is called a proof.

A proper mathematical proof consists of several parts. First, there is a clear,
precise statement of what you are trying to prove. Second, there is a set of assumptions
of things which are taken to be true and hence used as part of the proof.
Third, there is a chain of reasoning which takes you from these assumptions to the
statement you are trying to prove. Finally, there is a little square ( ) or QED at the
bottom to denote that you have finished, representing the Latin phrase for “thus
it is demonstrated.”

Types of notation: english, pseudocode, programming language. If your idea is not clearly revealed when you express an algorithm, then you are using too low-level a notation to describe it.

Problem specifications have two parts: (1) the set of allowed input instances,
and (2) the required properties of the algorithm’s output. It is impossible to prove
the correctness of an algorithm for a fuzzily-stated problem. Put another way, ask
the wrong problem and you will get the wrong answer.

The best way to prove that an algorithm is incorrect is to produce an instance in
which it yields an incorrect answer. Such instances are called counter-examples.

Mathematical induction is usually the right way to verify the correctness of a recursive or incremental insertion algorithm. It is essentially used to prove that a property P(n) holds for every natural number n, i.e. for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on. First case, called the base case (or, sometimes, the basis), proves that the property holds for the number 0. The second case, called the induction step, proves that, if the property holds for one natural number n, then it holds for the next natural number n + 1.

Summation formula are concise expressions describing the addition of an arbitrarily
large set of numbers, in particular the formula. Two types: Geometric series (the index of the loop effects the exponent) and Arithmetic progressions.

### 1.4

Combinatorial Objects

- Permutations – which are arrangements, or orderings, of items. For example,
  {1, 4, 3, 2} and {4, 3, 2, 1} are two distinct permutations of the same set of four
  integers. We have already seen permutations in the robot optimization problem,
  and in sorting. Permutations are likely the object in question whenever
  your problem seeks an “arrangement,” “tour,” “ordering,” or “sequence.”

- Subsets – which represent selections from a set of items. For example, {1, 3, 4}
  and {2} are two distinct subsets of the first four integers. Order does not
  matter in subsets the way it does with permutations, so the subsets {1, 3, 4}
  and {4, 3, 1} would be considered identical. We saw subsets arise in the movie
  scheduling problem. Subsets are likely the object in question whenever your
  problem seeks a “cluster,” “collection,” “committee,” “group,” “packaging,”
  or “selection.”

- Trees – which represent hierarchical relationships between items. Figure
  1.8(a) shows part of the family tree of the Skiena clan. Trees are likely the
  object in question whenever your problem seeks a “hierarchy,” “dominance
  relationship,” “ancestor/descendant relationship,” or “taxonomy.”

- Graphs – which represent relationships between arbitrary pairs of objects.
  Figure 1.8(b) models a network of roads as a graph, where the vertices are
  cities and the edges are roads connecting pairs of cities. Graphs are likely
  the object in question whenever you seek a “network,” “circuit,” “web,” or
  “relationship.”

- Points – which represent locations in some geometric space. For example,
  the locations of McDonald’s restaurants can be described by points on a
  map/plane. Points are likely the object in question whenever your problems
  work on “sites,” “positions,” “data records,” or “locations.”

- Polygons – which represent regions in some geometric spaces. For example,
  the borders of a country can be described by a polygon on a map/plane.
  Polygons and polyhedra are likely the object in question whenever you are
  working on “shapes,” “regions,” “configurations,” or “boundaries.”

- Strings – which represent sequences of characters or patterns. For example,
  the names of students in a class can be represented by strings. Strings are
  likely the object in question whenever you are dealing with “text,” “characters,”
  “patterns,” or “labels.”

Learning to think recursively is learning to look for big things that are made from
smaller things of exactly the same type as the big thing.
